Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
♪ gentle music ♪
♪♪♪
[woman]
speaking native language
[all] speaking native language
[Imelda] Okay.
Go now. Go now.
Go. go.
Go. go. go. go. go.
Go now.
This was a little paradise.
This is the palace.
Not exactly the palace.
because it was not really
a very comfortable place
to live in.
but I miss the clout.
wherein. um...
you can do so much.
♪ soft music ♪
♪♪♪
She's using the body
for political purposes.
because her big dream
is to restore the greatness
of the Marcos family.
and it can only be done
if you give him
a hero's burial.
And of course.
outside of that.
getting one of the children
to run for the presidency.
The main goal of Imelda Marcos
is to vindicate
the family's honor.
the family's name.
except that
the Filipino nation
will never allow for that.
I. Ferdinand Edralin Marcos...
My husband.
President Marcos.
became president
at the height of the Cold War.
[man] Ferdinand Marcos
was the most powerful man
ever to rule the Philippines.
His stature
among world leaders
brought him credibility
at home.
We love your adherence
to democratic principle
and to the democratic
processes.
[man] The Marcos family
appeared to be living
the Filipino equivalent
of Camelot.
[man] She made it known
that she would one day be more
than the average first lady.
[man] Marcos' wife. Imelda.
is seen by many
as the real power
behind her husband's regime.
[man] Imelda embraced fame
with a passion.
the first lady
in a political dynasty
that ruled
as if the Philippines
were a personal treasure.
But for all that.
friends say Imelda is
a deeply committed politician
who believes
she is closely associated
with her people's destiny.
[Imelda] My dream
for my country
is to regain
paradise for all.
and everything
that was beautiful.
that would make people happy.
would be there.
But I don't just dream.
I want to give birth to it.
I want to make it real.
♪ uplifting music ♪
♪♪♪
Hello. hello. hello. hello.
hello. hello. hello.
MaryAnn Bunyi.
head executive assistant.
- Hello. hello.
- Good morning. ma'am.
[Imelda] Oh. my gosh.
Shirley.
[speaking indistinctly]
speaking native language
- Thank you.
- speaking native language
Thank you.
Let's go here.
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
I'm really so shocked because
this was like a playhouse.
and there was music
and there was...
beauty everywhere.
where children could play.
I'm so disappointed.
Now...
Sit down?
[indistinct chatter]
And look straight at me.
at my camera.
- I look at you?
- Look at me.
[camera shutter clicks]
♪ gentle music ♪
Well. I had a beautiful
and very happy childhood
until I was eight years old.
but when I lost my mother.
it seemed like
I lost everything.
And being orphaned
from my mother
and left
with nothing.
I was always looking
for someone to love me.
This created my character.
I grew up in a province.
When there was
this Miss Universe contest.
I went to Manila.
and they made me Miss Manila.
And that's how Marcos
became aware
there was an Imelda
in Manila.
When I met Ferdinand Marcos.
he was a congressman.
In the first 20 minutes.
he proposed marriage.
I realized maybe
this is the love.
the mothering
that I'm waiting for.
So in 11 days.
we got married.
[Mary] He was brilliant
beyond all imagining.
and she was
drop-dead gorgeous.
They have style
with a capital S.
[birds chirping]
[Imelda] Marcos bought
this house in 1946.
This is where he brought me
when we got married.
After all this shoe thing
about Imelda. uh.
having so many shoes.
so people will give me
things like this.
So you see.
the shoes became a joke.
[chuckles]
I was of help to him
because our family
happens to be strategically
on the other side
of the Philippines.
My family comes from the south.
and he comes from the north.
And so it was
a good combination.
and I could campaign.
and I would sing too.
[both]
♪ singing in native language ♪
♪♪♪
[applause]
In the beginning.
I was having a hard time
because here in this house.
there were always
plenty of people.
and I was not used to that.
Everything became so public.
I had to cut ribbons.
I had to do this.
I had to do that.
It came to a point that
I-I could not take
politics. really.
And I was brought
to the hospital in New York
because I was on the verge
of a nervous breakdown.
And the doctor said. "There's
nothing wrong with her.
She does not like
politics. only."
Then Marcos answered.
"If that's the case.
right now. I quit politics."
When I heard that.
and I knew he wanted
to be president
so that he could maximize
his wealth and talent.
then I said to myself.
"Shame on you. Imelda.
Here is the one man
who's going to give up
everything for you."
I had to get a psychologist
to say how lucky I am
that I am honored
to cut ribbons.
how lucky I am
that I'm invited here.
how lucky I am that people
come to my house.
how lucky I am...
Eventually I believed it.
and before I knew it.
I was really lucky and happy.
I was completely different
after that.
♪ pensive music ♪
♪♪♪
[Beth]
Imelda very much enjoyed
the role of first lady.
and Marcos was afraid
to leave the Philippines
for fear there'd be a coup.
So he used Imelda
as the surrogate president.
and she loved that.
[Imelda]
I did not want to read books
about the leaders
that I was going to meet.
because I had my own eyes.
I had my own ears and senses.
Many leaders
were called monsters.
I did not find
they were very mean.
They were generous.
They were kind.
And if I did not know
what was the problem.
I would ask Chairman Mao.
"What's your problem?"
It's the same
with Saddam Hussein.
"What's your problem?"
I can really say
that there was no mission
at the height of the Cold War
that. uh. I failed.
[birds chirping]
Here is Russia.
[frames clatter.
glass shatters]
Here.
Here is Russia
with [indistinct].
[glass clatters]
And here is Mrs. Mao.
This is. uh. President Nixon
playing the piano.
and I'm singing there.
He would come and call on me
at my suite at Waldorf.
He was very nice
and very human.
but he was misunderstood.
♪ gentle music ♪
There are many things
women can do.
♪♪♪
Sometimes it helps
that you're not taken
too seriously.
This is. um. the romantic
Ferdinand Marcos.
Every time. uh.
I would go abroad.
he would give me
a picture and--
of him.
and here he would write.
"I shall bear my loneliness
when you are away.
To my eternal love."
♪ light music ♪
♪♪♪
I must say that
now that I look back
at 35 years of marriage
to Marcos.
I had a beautiful
married life.
and I don't remember any...
bad or ugly...
sad. um. situation.
♪♪♪
[Beth] Marcos had an eye
for the ladies.
which he didn't give up
when he married. I might add.
He had a world map. and he
picked the farthest places
from Manila
he could send his wife
and got her out of the way
so he could carry on
his affairs.
And the one that he made
a mistake about
was this Dovie Beams.
who-who was an American.
♪♪♪
Disgusting.
Very disgusting.
Oh. I'm sure Imelda
was heartbroken about that.
I'm sorry that he-he did that.
That-that was...
very sad for me.
[Beth] She had loved Marcos.
and it did hurt her
that he went to other women.
I mean. she cried once
on the general's shoulder.
and she said. "I give him
everything he wants.
and still he cheats on me."
[Marcos]
♪ singing gently ♪
[Dovie laughing.
speaking indistinctly]
Oh. yes. there was
a tape recorder under the bed.
That was it.
So that's what
she held over him.
When she wanted something new.
she would say.
"I'll play the tapes again."
you know. and. uh.
he'd give-give in
to whatever she said.
After that. no one would ever
stop her from anything.
It was a shame.
because her personality
changed too.
♪ intrepid music ♪
When Marcos became president.
the Philippines was only
22 years after World War II.
Manila was leveled
to the ground like Warsaw.
We had no rice.
We had no water.
We had no light.
We had nothing.
So we had to do it
with a meager amount.
[Mary] The Marcoses
were living like kings.
No two ways about it.
They spent money. all right.
They did.
Imelda. they used to say.
had an edifice complex.
She loved buildings.
and I think that probably.
in some ways. traces back
to her background.
which was relatively humble.
She called me one day
when she was staying
at the Waldorf in New York:
"What do you think
of the Crown Building?"
I said. "You know.
it's beautiful.
You know. 57th and Fifth
and all that.
And it's a lovely building."
She said. "I'm gonna buy it."
you know.
And then she bought...
four more.
She was a spontaneous person
for acquisitions.
If she saw something she liked.
she'd take it.
Like buying out jewelry stores
in Paris.
And shipping animals
from Africa.
♪ percussive music ♪
♪♪♪
We were on safari in Kenya.
and Imelda was fascinated
with the wild animals.
I got so envious
that we didn't have those.
So she ordered them.
You know. like you buy
a dress in Paris.
you bring in animals
from Africa.
Then I said. "I will complete
paradise for the Philippines.
because we will also have
the animals from Africa here."
[Tony] There was
an American Texas rancher
called Frank Yturria.
He had met
the late President Marcos
long before he came
president. in 1954.
The president asked Frank.
could they put some animals
on an island?
And they start talking about
getting exotic animals in.
[Frank] Well. the new
president of Kenya
has put an embargo on shipping
any more wild animals
out of Kenya.
We couldn't do it.
And the telephone rang.
and my wife said.
"It's the president of
the Philippines calling you."
I said. "Hello. Mr. President."
and he said.
"Frank. I went and talked
with President Kenyatta.
and he agreed to let me
have the animals."
He said. "And by the way.
I left a large briefcase
on his desk."
He said. "Need I say more?"
I said. "No. sir.
you don't have to say more."
♪ exciting music ♪
♪♪♪
[Tony] The deal
was already completed.
and we already had gotten
a lot of animals in captivity.
We'd taken a giraffe.
Burchell's zebra.
impala. and waterbuck.
[Beth] I have no idea
what it cost.
but she got her own
little private zoo
shipped from Africa.
When Imelda's animals arrived.
it was a problem of where
these new guests would go
if they were to roam free.
which she insisted.
So they finally settled
on this small island
where they wouldn't
run into people.
It was an island
that was not inhabited
by a group of people
or did not have. um.
communities there.
except a few that I could.
uh. tell them what to do.
[birds chirping]
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[camera shutter clicks]
[Imelda]
I was always criticized
for being excessive.
but that is mothering.
That is the spirit
of mothering.
You cannot quantify love.
And with my spirit
and character of mothering.
I want to mother not only
the Philippines but the world.
[Bongbong]
When I was younger. uh.
my father and mother
were always terribly busy.
They were never home.
They were always
off campaigning
or doing something
terribly important.
I really regretted the time
that I was away
from my parents.
But this is the life
the politicians have.
As far as I'm concerned.
the best politician
that I've ever seen
is my mother.
Her politics
are very intuitive
and natural.
I said. "I think I want you
to be president one day
like your dad."
and they were very close.
especially so
he was the only boy.
Bongbong studied abroad
since he was nine years old.
He was in London.
He was at Oxford. Wharton.
He was a little bit
of a nerd as a kid.
so he was--you know.
he wanted to do physics.
math. biology.
but my grandfather was like.
"There's no money in that.
so switch to politics."
[Imelda] I told him.
"You are needed now."
[chuckles]
My mother wanted me to run
since I was eight years old.
so that's a given. you know?
She-she's the one going around
and telling everyone.
"Oh. you must help my son
like this and like that."
"Mom. we haven't decided yet."
"Yeah. yeah. but it's okay.
Once you decide.
that will be ready. so..."
She's so political
an animal. really.
There's pressure for him
to run for president.
But. um...
Thinking it over.
we-we-we all decided
that it would be best
to go vice president
and then if...
God willing.
the presidency.
♪ gentle music ♪
♪♪♪
[crowd cheering]
[man] Welcome to Senator
Bongbong Marcos in the house.
Bongbong Marcos.
[crowd cheering]
[crowd chanting]
Bongbong. president!
[man] Of course. we would
also like to acknowledge
Madame Imelda
Romualdez Marcos.
[cheers and applause]
♪♪♪
[crowd chanting]
BBM! BBM! BBM!
[cheers and applause]
♪♪♪
[indistinct chatter]
The vice presidency
in the Philippines
is something quite different
from what it is
maybe in the United States.
We are voted in. uh.
separately.
Means that the vice president
has their own mandate.
Of course. a vice president's
main function
is to take over.
should the president
be unable to continue.
Uh. that-that remains.
But nobody voted any-anyone
to just wait
for-for the president
or their boss to die.
We-we have to find ways
to make yourself useful.
[Leni]
It-it was common knowledge
that Senator Bongbong
was eyeing the presidency.
and people close to him
were-were saying that. um.
he opted to run for
the vice presidency instead
because he had better chances
of-of winning
the vice presidency
instead of the presidency.
but I think. um.
this will only be
a stepping-stone
to what he really wants.
and that is to be president
just like his father.
[Ferdinand] The commander in
chief is authorized to adopt
all the measures necessary
to prevent the success
of the enemy.
[people shouting frantically]
[man] Marcos blamed
growing discontent
on communist insurgents.
He jailed dissidents
and silenced
all political opposition.
[Frank]
The Marcos dictatorship
had been in power for years.
and the people themselves were
starting to get tired of it.
Plus the fact that the regime
had become very corrupt.
The young feel so disenchanted
and frustrated.
They feel that there is
no future for them.
Prices are going up.
People are lining up
in the streets to buy rice.
People cannot find employment.
The wealthy controls
the destiny of our people.
This must give way
to meaningful reforms.
[Etta] People loved
listening to Aquino.
and he spoke flawlessly.
And we all knew that. uh.
if he would run for elections.
he would easily win.
[Beth] Imelda. I think.
had dated him
when they were
young and single.
and she thought
that Ninoy Aquino
would always be loyal to her.
but he was not.
because he developed a real
force against the Marcoses.
[Ninoy] The battle has been
joined. and the time has come
for all Filipinos
to take sides.
Either you are
for the cause of freedom
or the curse of tyranny.
[Noynoy] We were awakened
in the middle of the night.
and. um. my father
had been arrested.
[man] Former Senator
Benigno Aquino
has been jailed on charges
of subversion.
[camera shutters clicking]
Aquino's supporters
say he was framed
because he is the president's
foremost political opponent.
All of a sudden.
I developed a chest pain.
and I told my doctor.
"I am very. very weak.
Please bring me to
the Philippine Heart Center
and get me an examination."
When Ninoy Aquino was sick
and he was in the hospital
in the Heart Center.
my project.
I can say that I was
overly generous to him.
Lo and behold.
the beautiful one
ascended into my suite.
[laughter]
She came.
and she was really beautiful.
She has not aged.
And she sat down and said...
"I'm sorry to see you
like that.
Would you like to go
to America?"
- [laughter]
- Oh. oh.
[Cory] He felt
that he owed it
to the Filipino people.
He wanted to have
an audience with Marcos
and tried to persuade him
to call for clean
and orderly elections.
♪ somber music ♪
The very fact alone that
we can land is victory enough.
Everything after that's
a bonus.
I mean. whether they put me
back in a plane
and ship me out
or bring me to prison.
I promised to return.
I have returned
against all odds.
So that's good enough for me.
So it was Ver. General Ver.
and Imelda Marcos
who were. you know.
in a way. calling the shots.
Sure. sure.
Thank you.
[speaking indistinctly]
I want to kiss him!
[cheers and laughter]
♪ tense music ♪
You have to be very ready
with your hand camera.
because this action
can become very fast.
[man] Yes.
In a matter of three.
four minutes.
it could be all over. you know?
And...
[chuckles]
I may not be able to talk
to you again after this.
♪♪♪
[gunshots]
[people screaming]
♪♪♪
That case remains unresolved.
[crowd chanting indistinctly]
[Beth]
Well. it was never proven.
you know. there was
a hired assassin.
but. uh. General Romulo.
he was just heartbroken
over that.
because it was such a-a
miserable. nasty thing to do.
Of course. he suspected
that it was Imelda.
They were saying so.
but why would I do that?
He was no threat to me.
In fact. I knew him
before I knew Marcos.
And some people. they say
that he was courting me.
And. uh--but. um...
And it's not in my character
to even quarrel with anyone.
how much more kill anyone.
♪ somber music ♪
And God knows...
I was very kind to him.
[camera shutter clicking]
[Etta] The killing of the late
Senator Benigno Aquino
sparked the movement
that really
brought out the people
in their numbers.
[crowd chanting indistinctly]
[man] Under pressure
from the United States.
Marcos called
a snap election.
Recalling once more
Ninoy's words.
and I quote.
"I will never be able
to forgive myself
if I will have to live
with the knowledge
that I could
have done something
and I did not do anything."
I hereby affirm my candidacy...
[cheers and applause]
[man] President Marcos
and his wife. Imelda.
continue their
hard-hitting campaign.
charging that the challenger
shouldn't even be running
for the presidency.
I have no experience
in cheating. stealing.
lying. or assassinating
political opponents.
[crowd cheering]
They couldn't be more opposite.
It could be a cartoon.
While Imelda. you know.
was ostentatious
and glamorous and into
everything and so fashionable.
and Cory. I doubt she even
wore nail polish.
You know. probably not.
But very intelligent
and very well educated.
She really knew
what she was about.
She'd been through a lot.
[man] At the end of the day.
the popular support
Mrs. Aquino inspired
was translated into votes.
[Cory] I am counting
on a landslide
to offset any cheating
that Marcos will do.
[man] We came here. and we
couldn't find our names.
and there's
about a thousand people
who are the same. you know?
[man] There was always
the possibility
that Marcos would use fraud
to beat Mrs. Aquino.
despite assurances
to the contrary.
But by and large.
it will be a fair.
honest. and clean election.
[man] But it was obvious
that they weren't.
Television crews
saw Marcos supporters
transported to and from
election rallies
and Marcos votes being bought
in exchange for food.
[Etta] The people realized
that it was rigged.
and even those who were
tabulating the elections.
young girls. stood up
in protest and got out.
and so the people saw
that despite the elections.
Marcos would still insist
that he was the winner.
I hereby proclaim
Ferdinand E. Marcos
as the duly elected president.
[crowd booing]
[crowd chanting]
Cory! Cory! Cory! Cory!
Cory! Cory! Cory!
♪ tense music ♪
[crowd clamoring]
[gunfire]
[man] Marcos loyalists
opened fire.
wounding dozens
and killing one.
It was so painful. because
Marcos just won the election
over Aquino.
We won by more
than one million votes.
[man] Ferdinand Marcos.
after 20 years in power.
laid defiant claim
to another six-year term.
There is no way under which
I can step down or resign
from the position of president.
You know. when it finally
was reduced
to just the Marcos family
alone in Malacañan Palace.
and there were people
at the gates
just being held off
by a security force.
and that's when
he finally agreed
they ha-they had to leave.
and Imelda wanted
to leave too.
♪♪♪
A few days before.
there was a big reception
that I had to wear
some jewelry.
It's just been confirmed
that Mr. Marcos
has indeed left.
and there's absolute chaos
outside his palace.
[man] As it drew
near midnight in Manila.
the demonstrators stormed
the gates of the palace
to take back
what they said was theirs.
They looted Marcos' property.
They rifled his files
and defiled his portraits.
They raided the Marcos'
refrigerator.
This has been stolen
from the Filipino people!
[man] It was a burst
of long-pent-up fury
spent on a palace
that was the very symbol
of the Marcos dictatorship.
Filipinos were staggered
by the opulence
and by Imelda's
famous closet.
[man] The designer dresses.
some from Rome.
where only days
before fleeing.
she placed her last
$80.000 order.
[man] She left behind
3.000 pairs of shoes.
They found no skeletons
but found only
beautiful shoes.
♪ lively music ♪
The long agony is over.
We are finally free.
and we can be truly proud
of the unprecedented way
we achieved our freedom.
It's not true that we flee
from our country.
We were kidnapped.
They told us
we were going to Paoay.
a town in Ilocos.
only to be brought to Hawaii.
[helicopter rotors whirring]
And losing your country
after being mother
of your country
for more than 20 years.
then you became orphan.
it was like losing
my mother again.
[Frank] Of course.
the United States government
double-crossed Marcos.
because there are elements
in the United States
that don't like dictators.
Even though the dictators
are our dictators.
they don't like 'em.
When I was being considered
to be ambassador
to the Philippines
during Ronald Reagan's time.
what killed me
was that I told him
that I was all in favor
of Marcos remaining.
"But he's a dictator."
Yes. he's a dictator.
but I said.
"If you don't keep Marcos.
I'm telling you
that you're gonna lose
all American military bases
in the Philippines."
What happened?
We lost 'em
when Aquino came in.
Our hearts and hands
are with President Aquino
and her new government
as they set out to meet
the challenges ahead.
Today the Filipino people
celebrate the triumph
of democracy.
and the world
celebrates with them.
You have many friends.
and suddenly
when you are not in power.
they don't even know you.
[man] So far. investigators
say they've uncovered
strong evidence
of at least $250 million
worth of Marcos real estate
in the United States alone.
Investigators are also
checking to see
if American money
has been stolen
in the hundreds of projects
financed all over the country
by U.S. aid.
Frivaldo says corruption
was widespread
in the highway program
of his province.
highways built
with U.S. aid money.
Instead of having
six to eight inches concrete
on the highways.
they would normally do it
with two inches.
[man] Was Marcos getting
any of this money?
What else can you deduce?
Tell me a country
that doesn't have corruption.
and don't say the U.S..
because we're the worst.
We give money to countries.
and the money is not used for
the purpose it was sent for.
and we know it.
First she had a beautiful home
in. uh. Beverly Hills.
She put it in
George Hamilton's name.
And when
the Marcos regime fell.
George sold it.
Kept the money.
So you see.
everybody's corrupt.
[laughs]
They even filed a case
against me.
The United States government
against Imelda Marcos.
This is only one case.
Three hundred fifty thousand
documents.
I had a house full
of documents.
- [Imelda] Can you open the...
- [woman] Yes. ma'am.
- [man] Open the door.
- [indistinct chatter]
[Imelda] Here I placed
the documents from New York.
This is only one case
against Mrs. Marcos
in the trial of the century.
♪ dramatic music ♪
♪♪♪
[camera shutter clicks]
[woman] Ferdinand Marcos.
the former president.
died Thursday in Hawaii.
♪ somber music ♪
My husband was dead.
I did not know where to live.
[man] Imelda Marcos
is wearing black
for her racketeering trial.
[Imelda] You're facing
the mightiest sword
of justice of the world.
and you're alone. widowed.
and homeless and countryless
and penniless.
The jail would have been
a welcome thing.
It would be free board
and lodging.
Anyway. on my birthday.
July 2. 1990.
not guilty on all counts.
[crowd cheering]
[man] Her lawyers
told the jury
even though Imelda Marcos
was a world-class spender.
that was not a crime.
that however Ferdinand Marcos
made the money
was his business. not hers.
I won it because of the truth.
In spite of all that.
Cory says...
"She cannot come back home."
There was an undercurrent
of-of-of this.
"How do we-how do we get home?"
We-we all basically escaped.
the kids. from the States.
We weren't allowed to leave.
but we left anyway.
I remember very well
buying the ticket.
and I said. "I can't
come home in coach."
You know. I said--
called up a friend; I said.
"Can you--I can't--
I don't have any money
to buy a first-class ticket.
Buy me a first-class--
I can't come home--
I've always been
in first class.
It's just too embarrassing."
[man] Her son. Bongbong.
staged his own
triumphant return last week.
[Bongbong] And while I was
still at the airport.
I immediately
phoned my mother.
who scolded me and said.
"What are you doing there?"
I'll never forget. but I said.
"Mom. come home.
It's fine. It's safe.
We're gonna be all right."
And a couple of weeks later.
she was home.
It was God's plan to...
make me born
in the Philippines.
Nobody can stop me.
[crowd clamoring]
[woman] Surrounded by her
bodyguards and supporters.
Imelda Marcos passed through
nearly hysterical crowds
toward the suburban
Manila courthouse.
ready to face
corruption charges
that could put her in prison
for more than 100 years.
The former first lady
surrendered to authorities
in order to be granted
immediate bail.
One of her lawyers brought
the bail money in cash.
rolled up in
a Mister Donut napkin.
A woman who had traveled
in the world's
most powerful circles
for more than two decades was
fingerprinted and released.
awaiting her day in court
on more than 70 civil
and criminal charges.
The Marcoses during
their. um. tenure in power.
plundered a lot
of the nation's wealth.
$5 billion to $10 billion
in 1986.
They felt that Philippine
government funds
belonged to them
because they were the leaders
of the country at that time.
[Bongbong] When I first
arrived back home.
being a Marcos was an issue.
It was a political issue.
It really...it hurt us a lot.
especially media-wise.
because the problem
with the media is.
the gun can kill you
only up to the grave.
but the media can kill you
beyond the grave into infinity.
[man] While we are allowing
the return of Imelda Marcos.
the ban on the return
of the remains
of Ferdinand Marcos
will continue.
We announced that we were
bringing him back. and...
The Aquinos
have been very unjust.
inhuman
to the Marcoses.
not only to the living
but also to the dead.
No. no.
[Imelda] No less than the son
of Cory is president now.
Between the mother
and the son.
you cannot tell who's worse.
[Andy] The commission
was created in 1986
to track down and repatriate
plundered wealth.
So far. we've been able
to remit back $4 billion.
but I also hasten to add
that many of these assets
also have...you know.
have really appreciated
in terms of value.
Oh. they sequestered
everything.
♪ somber music ♪
All the jewelry
that they would find.
all the valuables
that they would encounter.
all the beautiful things.
♪♪♪
The PCGG just would confiscate
anything they wanted to get
that they felt was stolen.
Even this house.
only a few months ago.
was. um. being auctioned off.
We cannot stay really here.
because we do not know
when we will be kicked out.
♪♪♪
Look. I am no longer
first lady.
I do not--
I'm not even allowed
to go around the world
anymore.
They prohibit me.
Everything--I can--
I cannot even have--
I have money in 170 banks
and deposits of assets.
I cannot even have them.
And I. even at this stage.
even at my age.
I can go around the world
and bring world peace.
I befriended all of them.
Gaddhafi was a friend.
Um. Saddam Hussein.
Mister. um...
Mao Tse-tung.
I just gave respect to him.
He took my hand
and kissed it.
In five minutes. he said.
"Mrs. Marcos. you started
the end of the Cold War."
In five minutes--Mao!
So--and who is Imelda?
♪ gentle music ♪
♪♪♪
I don't have an answer
for why we allow Imelda
to even open her mouth.
I'd be--I'd be...okay
for them to return.
That's the Filipino in me.
It's not okay
for them to flaunt...
flaunt what they stole.
[crowd cheering]
♪♪♪
[Imelda] When I came back
from abroad.
in spite of all
the bad publicity...
[crowd chanting]
Imelda! Imelda!
That is something
that surprises Americans.
and all I can think of.
the Filipinos
are very forgiving people.
Nobody said.
"You can't do it."
She came back.
♪ exciting music ♪
♪♪♪
[crowd cheering]
Thank you.
- Thank you.
- Happy birthday. ma'am.
♪♪♪
speaking native language
You want a taste
of my shoes?
[laughter]
[indistinct chatter]
I was only eight years old
when I became orphan.
And when you lose your money--
your-your mother.
you lose everything.
You still have plans
of running?
Or are you going to anoint
any of your children
to do the Marcos work for you?
Well. I go on and on
about Bongbong.
and he-he's my only son.
So we will be seeing
another Marcos in Malacañan?
Being president is a...
destiny.
♪ gentle music ♪
[crowd cheering. shouting]
[cheers and applause]
The San Juanico Bridge
is that beautiful bridge.
That is called
the "Bridge of Love"
as a gift of President Marcos
to his beautiful wife. Imelda.
[Imelda] My projects.
I did not make them
only good and right.
It had to be beautiful.
And beauty's really
the extravagance of love.
♪♪♪
Once we left. I think then
it started to fall to pieces.
as often happens
with a change in government.
and all the people poured
back onto the island.
and nobody's tried
to stop them.
They couldn't.
[birds chirping]
♪♪♪
[Tony] So you cannot say
to a giraffe.
"Don't wander in there.
That's somebody's garden."
The locals see them.
they get upset
'cause that's
their livelihood.
so they shoot them
or kill them.
♪ soft music ♪
♪♪♪
For anything to grow.
even animals. they need love.
That's why you need a mother
in a government.
because a mother makes
everything whole.
[Froilan] This project
started with big money.
[Tony] The mystery is. to me.
that Calauit
has lasted so long.
37 years. and it's still
surviving today.
[Imelda] When I came back
after our exile.
I went back to Calauit
to see how it was.
and I was really so depressed
and shocked to see
what had happened.
There was hardly anything left.
I've been here
for almost 40 years.
[Tony] They need
qualified people there
to stop inbreeding.
[giraffes grunting]
The present group have come
from a very small gene pool.
There's been no effort made
to separate father
from mating with daughter.
The son grows up
and breeds with his mother.
An animal doesn't know
the difference.
Inbreeding's already happened.
It's there.
The damage has been done.
I've heard
that some of the giraffe
have got shortened necks.
That's a physical one you see.
but the ones that do the harm
is the problems
you cannot see.
It's probably too late.
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[band playing
percussive music]
♪♪♪
[indistinct chatter]
Our vice president.
president.
We're really nostalgic today.
Today we remember my dad.
who is clearly with us
with this breezy weather.
Once again. we come to you
to ask for your support.
your affection.
and your continued loyalty
that my family has enjoyed
through all these decades.
All the municipalities
are joining hands
to support Bongbong
for vice president
2016.
[applause]
I would like to greet.
of course. our congresswoman
from the second district.
my mother.
- Congresswoman Imelda.
- [applause]
We who have enjoyed a time
when the Philippines
was seen as a bright light
in the community of nations.
when we ourselves
were proud to be Filipinos.
we enjoyed that time.
Unfortunately
that time has passed.
It's time to return
to that moment in time.
[applause]
♪ gentle music ♪
♪♪♪
Yes. well. that's...
that's-that's very important.
getting the right message
across.
We have to see.
Time will only tell.
[crowd clamoring]
[crowd chanting] Bongbong!
Bongbong! Bongbong! Bongbong!
[Bongbong] Campaigns.
in fact. are fun.
Except for the candidate.
Dealing with the public
is a chore.
The candidate's stressed out
all the way.
I'm often asked
by members of the media.
"Is it an advantage
or a disadvantage
to be born a Marcos in this
day and age in politics?"
First of all.
my name is Ferdinand Marcos.
I mean. how are you going
to separate?
And I'm his son.
Um. there's no getting away
from that.
So. um. no. I have no reason
or desire to separate myself.
What it is. it is.
[crowd shouting]
It's difficult
and it's also scary
in the sense
that if-if these people
are brought to power again.
there's a very big chance
that the sins of the past
will be committed again
in the future.
[crowd chanting]
Never again! Never again!
Never again martial law!
As of the 21st of this month.
I signed
proclamation number 1081.
placing the entire Philippines
under martial law.
[crowd shouting. whistle blows]
[man] The situation
in the Philippines
is obscured
by rigid news censorship
imposed when President Marcos
put the country under
martial law last Friday.
Fourteen of Manila's 15
newspapers have been closed.
Marcos has said he is trying
to save his country
from communism.
Ferdinand Marcos
mobilized the military
and the police in order
to perpetuate himself in power.
[gunshots]
♪ grim music ♪
Martial law. that was
the best years of Marcos
because that was when
he was able to give
the Philippines
sovereignty. freedom.
justice. human rights.
♪♪♪
[Pete]
Martial law was declared.
A lot of journalists who were.
uh. critical of the government
had been arrested.
but since I eluded
the arresting unit.
I went underground.
I was going
to a secret house.
When the door was opened. uh.
three strange men were there.
and they pulled me in.
They made me sit
and-and. uh.
tied my hands.
um. blindfolded me.
and started. uh.
hours of questioning.
I was a teacher.
One thing led to another.
I got involved.
To meet as five people
was enough to arrest you
and detain you
and accuse you of subversion.
We were taken to...
an open-air barracks
for the enlisted men.
Uh. they'd hit me in the chest.
They. uh. made me. uh. squat.
and while I was squatting.
they'd hit my shins
with a bamboo handle.
The electric shocks.
they-they were really painful.
'cause they'd. you know.
increase the voltage
every time you lied to them.
They made me do
what they called. uh.
the San Juanico Bridge.
They made me lie down
between two beds
with my head on one bed
and my feet on the other
and my body
hanging in the air.
I would fall from the pull
of gravity.
Isn't it cynical?
The Bridge of Love
for one set of people
becomes a method of torture
for another set of people.
the so-called
enemies of the state.
I was really scared that they
were going to rape me.
They made me lie down.
So they started
to take the panties out.
I don't know who.
because it--I was blindfolded.
I only knew that all my--
both my arms and my legs
were being held down.
And someone started
running his hands
all over my body.
Then some finger went in.
And they said...
"You probably have. uh.
small letters hidden inside."
By then. I wasn't fighting.
I was numb.
I was ready for it.
I was burned with. um.
wax candle.
I was molested.
sexually molested
by agents of the state.
So the fingers were getting
in and out and in.
and then there was
a radio call.
The radio call said.
"Bring the girl in."
No hands were
holding me anymore.
but I couldn't get up.
It wasn't from the beating.
It was from the...
uh...
disillusionment that people.
people as in persons.
can actually do these things
to another.
And some of those
who tortured me
were actually students of mine
who were planted
in the schools
to spy on us.
[Pete] My brother.
when I was in prison.
decided that he would
join the resistance.
At some point.
the military command--
the commander of the unit
that. uh. caught them
decided. "Ah. let's not bring
them to the camp anymore.
Get rid--kill them."
♪ somber music ♪
He was 27 at the time.
♪♪♪
They were not
officially executed.
That-that's just it.
That-that's why it's called
extrajudicial executions.
extrajudicial killings.
[rain pattering]
And. uh. there's the rain.
♪♪♪
My body was traumatized.
I had no control
over the tremors.
[chuckles]
The agents. they came to me.
and they said.
"Ma'am. can we continue
with the history classes?"
So what did I do?
I taught them.
I helped them.
Helped me recover.
'Cause to them...
In Filipino. they'd say...
speaking Filipino
"Nothing personal.
This is just work."
I felt proud about myself.
I stood up to them.
I did not give away
any other.
It sort of like. um...
washed away.
washed away the-the pain.
because I bought their safety.
♪♪♪
[woman]
Senator Bongbong Marcos.
your opening statement.
please. sir.
First of all.
thank you for this chance
to speak to the issues
of the day.
[chuckles]
[woman] It's all right.
Senator Marcos. please continue
with your statement.
[crowd shouting]
Go ahead.
Go ahead. please. sir.
[crowd cheering]
I cannot give
what I do not have.
- I do not have what you are--
- [crowd booing]
I do not have control.
I do not have any knowledge
of any of the things.
Once again. let me repeat.
I cannot give
what I do not have.
[crowd booing. shouting]
[reporters clamoring]
Senator Marcos is spending
a lot of money
in this campaign.
He's been paying off mayors.
congressmen. governors.
He's been giving out money
left and right.
And you ask yourself.
where is that--
where-where is all that money
coming from?
♪ regal music ♪
♪♪♪
This one is. of course.
a Picasso.
Marcos would say.
"Imelda. I know
how to earn money properly.
but you know how to spend
money properly
because you buy beauty."
We filed a motion with
the Philippine graft court.
called the Sandiganbayan.
and asked for
a writ of attachment
on these paintings
because they are the subject
of litigation.
There was a team that went
to her house in Makati.
and they took photographs
of the walls.
[camera shutter clicks]
You could see
that the paintings
had been replaced.
Yeah. yeah. yeah. yeah. yeah.
Here's another
interesting photo.
Here you can see the bust
of President Marcos.
And there are
two important paintings
on the left and right side.
but subsequently when
the raiding team came in.
there's the bust.
the medals are still there.
but instead of paintings.
you have the photos
of Mrs. Marcos
and President Marcos.
So they were removed.
There's the Michelangelo.
The photo of
President Marcos instead.
And I was also told that
the master's bedroom was locked
and that the team members
were not allowed to go in.
There was a. um...
a Monet painting
that was recently sold
in New York
for $32 million
by the social secretary
of Mrs. Marcos.
and that alerted
the authorities.
and they immediately
conducted an investigation
in respect of these funds.
So together with a colleague.
we went over to her house
and asked her. you know.
"Mrs. Marcos. we wanted to know
whether you are claiming
ownership of the painting."
And. uh. she replied to me.
"In case I do say
that I own the painting.
will it be given back to me?"
♪♪♪
There have been so many cases.
God knows how many cases
there have been.
Imelda Marcos has
gotten away with murder.
I mean. she-she always
gets acquitted.
[faint indistinct chatter]
The stealing of the money
by the billions
impacted all
the economic development
of the Filipino people
and made the people
impoverished.
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[Etta] There's a huge gap
between the rich
and the poor.
If you're rich
and you're in power.
it becomes very easy for you
to get the people
to your side. ensuring
that they're taken care of
by funds and money
that they spread around.
[choir]
♪ singing in native language ♪
♪♪♪
[inaudible dialogue]
To the mother of all.
our only first lady.
Madame Imelda.
with leaders who are one
with their people.
this nation
will be strong again.
Philippines will be
a great nation again.
♪♪♪
[indistinct chatter]
[Imelda] When I became
first lady.
it became
more demanding for me.
If I'm going
to the slum areas.
I have to dress up
and make myself
more beautiful because...
[camera shutter clicks]
[Etta] This continuing poverty
nurtured the intolerance
of the people
and their belief
that only a strong man
could give them security.
[crowd chanting indistinctly]
[Rodrigo] If I become
the president.
I will eradicate corruption.
criminality and drugs.
[crowd cheering]
[man] Mayor Rodrigo Duterte
took the number one spot
in the latest
presidential race survey.
Meanwhile
Senator Bongbong Marcos Jr.
got the lead in
the vice presidential survey.
with 26 percent.
[Etta] The elitist type
of democratic rule
that followed after Marcos
did not really go down
to the poor people.
What matters now
is for them to be informed.
♪ gentle music ♪
♪♪♪
[May] Our education system
has not been able
to put the lessons of history
in the history books.
[woman] speaking indistinctly
in native language
[May] Since the return
of the Marcoses.
there's been a trickle
of new information
in YouTube. in Google
that's a revision
of the interpretation
of martial law.
We are sure
it's the Marcoses.
♪ light music ♪
♪♪♪
[crowd cheering]
[cheers and applause]
[crowd chanting]
BBM! BBM!
[cheers and applause]
[all]
♪ singing in native language ♪
♪♪♪
♪ gentle music ♪
Good morning. good morning.
good morning.
The old job seemed
like a walk in the park
compared to this one.
Before. the main task
was to try to recover
ill-gotten wealth.
Now it is to preserve
our democracy.
He was newly appointed to be
the chief for the elections
in preparation to knock us out
again. I suppose.
[indistinct chatter]
Yes. I'm feeling--
I'm feeling that. uh.
by all indications.
we should be successful today.
And they know where--
what side of the bread
is buttered
and for whom to vote for.
[indistinct chatter]
♪ tense music ♪
[people shouting]
[woman] Yeah.
Oh. okay.
♪♪♪
It is now approximately
one to two hours
before the close
of our polling places.
and we are preparing for
the transmission of results
of the elections.
♪♪♪
[indistinct chatter]
[applause]
[man] Vice president!
[cheers and applause]
[laughter]
[applause]
[woman] The extremely close
vice presidential race
is keeping many people
on the edge of their seats.
[indistinct chatter]
Ah.
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[woman] Leni Robredo
takes the lead
on the partial and unofficial
count for vice president.
♪♪♪
[no audible dialogue]
[man] Bongbong Marcos
is firm he will not concede
the vice presidential race
to Leni Robredo.
Okay. we're now going
to an ANC live event.
as Senator Bongbong Marcos
is holding
a media briefing
after filing
an electoral protest
before the Supreme Court.
Let's listen in.
Against. uh. Leni Robredo.
the supposed and proclaimed
vice president. uh.
from the last elections.
because we have many--
we have been able to gather
many evidence--
much evidence. uh.
concerning several aspects
of the election.
Right after. um. I realized
that I was winning.
I already knew 100 percent
that he will not
accept defeat.
because this is the nearest
that he already got
to being back in power.
He did not want to disappoint
his mother or his family.
Um. this is a shortcut. um.
to get back to power
instead of trying again
in the next elections.
[Vivian] [indistinct].
what's the latest?
[man] Hi. Vivian.
You're right.
the canvassing of votes
for president and
vice presidential candidates
is finally over
after three days.
Leni Robredo is the vice
presidential front-runner
with 14.4 million votes.
followed by Bongbong Marcos
with 14.1 million votes.
♪♪♪
Such an interesting case.
Rody Duterte.
I have to say.
did you see this coming?
- No.
- Okay.
I didn't. uh.
see this coming.
[woman] It's like Trump.
No one saw Trump coming.
[crowd chanting]
Duterte! Duterte!
Duterte!
Somebody has to answer
for all of these things
that's happening
to the country.
Either you kill me.
or I will kill you idiots.
[cheers and applause]
I think people
voted him to power
because he looked like them;
he spoke like them.
Of course. it turns out that
he isn't at all from the poor.
His parents are rich
and so on.
but he managed
to package him-himself
so that he looked like
one from the people.
I do not do it
because of. uh--
We all know my father
was a cabinet member
of President Marcos
during the first term
of his presidency.
If there's--the close--
We have--we have been
supportive of him. um.
from-from the very beginning.
If there was any help
and any assistance given
to then-candidate Duterte.
it was in the form
of-of political endorsement.
It was a form
of political support.
♪♪♪
[Andy] Obviously there is
that connection
wherein money that had been
looted and hidden
is now being brought back
into the Philippines
in order to finance
political campaigns.
The PCGG was created solely
to pursue the ill-gotten wealth
of the Marcoses.
And what they want to do now
is to give that power
to the solicitor general.
who actively campaigned
for Senator Marcos
in the 2016 elections.
Cases will probably
be dismissed.
and the assets
that are under supervision
of the PCGG
will probably be returned
to the Marcoses.
It is quite ironic that...
having gone after
the Marcos' ill-gotten wealth.
which is in the billions
of dollars.
I am now being accused
of having ill-gotten wealth
in the millions of pesos.
and these allegations
are-are baseless.
and yet they were being made.
I know.
because they wanted
to destroy my credibility
as well as the credibility
of the 2016 elections.
Little did we know
that the Marcoses financed.
in a big way.
the election of Duterte.
So it was
a very convenient alliance.
which is now paving the way
for Bongbong Marcos
to get to Malacañan.
the sooner. the better.
Almost everyone
who has the balls
to criticize him in public
get ostracized.
get persecuted.
and I'm fully aware.
I'm fully aware
that my being very vocal
of this administration's
policies
will cost me something.
But. you know.
if I don't do it. who will?
The fact that President Aquino
appointed me
got me into
the hit list of people
that they wanted to be removed.
For the well-being
of my family.
including myself. I thought
that it would be beneficial
for everybody concerned that
I first leave the Philippines.
I went to my brother
in Oklahoma.
I am scared to return
to the Philippines.
Ever since the new
administration has come in.
the Marcoses have been able
to regain a lot
of political clout.
They have scrubbed clean
the sins of the past.
and they're trying
to project themselves
as the leaders
for the future.
[camera shutters clicking]
"Payback Time for
Campaign Contributions."
This is the title
of our statement.
[clears throat]
We express
our gravest concern
that the Marcoses bought
and paid for the privilege
of having
the dictator's remains
buried on sacred ground.
We simply never thought
to see this kind
of flagrant abuse
after the people's judgment
of the Marcoses in 1986.
[indistinct radio chatter]
♪ tense music ♪
♪♪♪
[May] This president.
during his campaign.
he said the funeral parlors
should prepare
for more business.
and now we have
30.000 people killed.
Deaths under investigation.
♪♪♪
[May] It is happening again.
and it reminds us
of what it felt
during the time
of the Marcos dictatorship.
We don't know
what to do. actually.
You cannot run to the police.
It's the police
that's doing it.
♪♪♪
Since Duterte cannot govern...
democratically.
he has to create an enemy
to justify the use of force.
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[helicopter rotors whirring]
[Bongbong] It was
my father's fervent wish
that when he came
to the end of his days
that he be buried
in a simple soldier's ceremony.
We thank
President Rodrigo Duterte
for his recognition of my
father's service to the nation.
Let us be the heroes that
my father asked us all to be
and finally bring
the Filipinos to greatness.
One day. we will just wake up
and find ourselves
having a new vice president.
and that is Bongbong Marcos.
because the conditions. um.
are there.
The Supreme Court. which
is trying the protest case.
is friendly to Duterte
and to the Marcoses
because it's
the same Supreme Court
that allowed the burial
of the late dictator
at the Heroes' Cemetery.
Duterte has been very vocal
that he would resign
as president
if he had Bongbong Marcos
for vice president.
Things will move the way
President Duterte will want it.
You need a strong leader.
You need
a strong leader.
The preparation for the return
of the Marcos family
to political power
started many years
before many were aware of it.
and people were just
taking it too easy.
not believing
that it was possible.
You know.
it is really inbreeding.
because when dynasties
are embedded
in the political
landscape already.
it's as if political positions
can just be inherited.
There have been a lot
of recorded ill effects
of allowing political
dynasties to flourish.
♪♪♪
[Imelda] I could not only be
number one first lady.
I had to be a mother.
I had to embrace everybody.
take care of everybody.
love everybody.
♪ gentle music ♪
Ensure that there was
a solution
to all their problems.
♪♪♪
And I was there totally.
I was no longer mother
of my family.
of the first family.
mother of the people
here in the Philippines.
After a while. I was mothering
all over the world.
♪♪♪
It is more than a fairy tale.
because it's
really unbelievable.
I gave birth
to what I dreamt of.
and I always got my way.
♪♪♪
♪ music continues ♪
♪ reverent music ♪
♪♪♪